With that said, we could start from
the playwright test and work our way down.
It seems like just for our own happiness,
that we'll kinda start at the bottom
with unit test and work our way up.
Again, we'll talk about unit testing.
We're not gonna go all
the way into the weeds.
We're not gonna do
the thing where are like,
let's write our own testing framework.
We're gonna kinda like run a few simple
ones to make sure that everyone's setup
works and that we're all on the same page
with, like, Vitest and stuff like that.
And then we'll kind of talk about
some of the more advanced techniques
that have been helpful to
me when refactoring code.
And then use that as our first foray
into building up a build process that
runs the aforementioned tests, and
make sure everything works
the way that we think it does.
If you have never seen a unit test before,
or you just wanna make
sure that we're on the same page,
this is a pretty good example.
We have a completely worthless
function called add.
It takes two arguments and
it uses the plus sign,
there's probably a lot more
tests that we would have to
write because JavaScript as you know,
two plus two equals two.
The string one plus one equals eleven.
I don't even remember what happens in
the other way, because I don't have to,
because I use TypeScript and
I know that a and b will be numbers and
I know that it will return a number.
So an entire set of tests that
I don't have to write anymore.
But I can have this
ridiculous one down here,
which is it should
correctly add two numbers.
Clearly there's nothing checking for
typos.
But we have an expect statement
that exercises the function,
and then we verify that it is
the answer that we expect.
You could use assert.
There are various
different ways to expect or
assert that things are what
you think they are.
They don't really matter that much,
whichever one makes you happiest.
I liked to assert for longest time, but
I lost that war because
nobody agrees with me.
An assertion is just basically,
or expectation is like, hey,
I'm expecting this if it's not,
throw an error.
All, and I'm gonna repeat this
about three more times over
our time together,
all a test runner does is runs your code.
An assert or
an expectation or expect throws
an error if it's not what you expect.
All the test does is collect those errors
and tell you about them at the end,
instead of blowing up after the first one.
That's all a unit test runner is.
You could write on yourself,
you shouldn't, you could.
Test is just making the code
do things like I said,
the test runner keeps track of it all.
A test suite is just
a pretentious way to refer to
a JavaScript file with a bunch of tests in
it that runs through it all and will know.
Awesome.
So what we're gonna do now is we're
gonna go and we're gonna just,
run some tests and see some and just look
at the tool that we're gonna be using for
both unit testing and component testing.
One if you've never used Vitest test or even
Jest before, maybe you're using Mocha,
just to make sure that,
we're all on the same wavelength.
We'll go take a look at the tests and
run some and give it a sense.
If you try to run just
a testing note on the repo.
If you try to run npm test from at
very top level, it will yell at you.
You just need to go into
one of the examples and
run it from there, and
it should be good to go.
So make sure you navigate
into source examples,
getting started and
try out both npm test and npx vitest,
which you can totally run from
the top level just don't.
And one what I would love in
this quote unquote exercise is,
if it's not working for you,
we should deal with that now.
Otherwise it gonna be a long day.
So we'll take a look at that,
but gonna run the tests and
we'll take a look at a few of them and
we'll talk about them.
But let's make sure everything
works before we get in too deep.
So the question was,
am I gonna use Happy DOM with vitest?
So let me start by answering
what Happy DOM is.
Your tests run in Node, right?
Things that Node does not have,
a window object,
a document object,
anything that is in the browser, right?
It's just running JavaScript.
Happy DOM and it's older sibling,
JSDOM are basically
spec compliant implementations
of the DOM API in Node.
So then you can go document.body and
you can deal with DOM nodes and
stuff along those lines.
And it will all just work even
though you don't have a real DOM.
And Happy DOM is a fast lightway,
way of dealing with that.
The origin story, for those of you who
care, is I started out using HappyDOM,
and then I had one edge case where
Happy DOM didn't update whether or
not a button was enabled or disabled.
And I lost half a day of my life.
On a whim, I switched out to JSDOM,
and it worked.
[LAUGH] So that informed it.
I use Happy DOM at work, and
I've never had a problem with it but
in this workshop, it's gonna be JSDOM but
other than one tiny edge case.
You can use whichever one makes you
happier, that was an unintended pun.
But generally speaking, I'm gonna go with
JSDOM because of one edge case at bitmain.
But like that also informs, that tells
you a little bit who I am as a person.
All right, so going into source (src) But
like spiritually,
we'll use a DOM abstraction, just not
happy dom for reasons and getting started.
And then cool, open that up in code.
And I should have just done
the entire thing but here we are.
And so in here I can run npm test.
And it will run my tests right and
we'll see everything like this.
If this looks like Jest to you because
you've used Jest, yes it does look like Jest.
One thing to note is that it drops
into this watch mode automatically.
As soon as you run the tests,
you can type in q to leave that or
you just hit Ctrl C like
everything in the terminal.
You can hit h for a bunch of options that
we'll kinda talk a little bit about later.
But you can rerun all the tests,
only the failed tests,
snapshots which we'll talk about later.
Filter by a file name or
filter by a particular test name,
if you're just working on one particular
thing and you only want that to run.
But generally speaking,
with out of the box the one major
difference between Vitest and
Jest is that out of the box,
you need to import the various
things that you're using.
So like describe, expect,
test, it so on and so forth.
If you hate that or
if you are migrating from Jest and
you don't wanna do that,
you can literally, for
your test suite, go in here and
say, globals is true.
And then all of those will now just be
globally available like they are in Jest.
Great, if you're migrating, great,
if you just don't want to import
those things all the time both
are totally fine with me.
They will be reasons why we have to
have them globally available later.
Particularly why I bring this up now,
is particularly when it comes to like,
remember how I said like you can just use
like third party extensions that are meant
for Jest?
Well, there's certain things that they
are expecting, unintended pun.
But yeah, so if you want them globally
available, that's how that works, and
you can see it right then and there.
Awesome, and so
we've got all of this kind of in place.
You can see some of these tests.
One of the questions that will probably
come up is what is the difference between
it and test?
Nothing.
Which one should you use?
I don't care.
Which one do I use?
I would love to tell you that my rule is
if it's in a describe block, I use it,
and if it's outside, I use test.
But that's not even true, if I find myself
writing sentences that start with it in
the test description then I will use it,
and if I find myself hating that,
I will use test.
They are the same thing,
they are no different.
Cool, one more thing is like,
true to be true,
then there's not to be
which is does not equal.
You can also expect that
a test fails right, so
this is like opposite day right where
this test only passes if it fails.
There are reasons why that will come
in handy at certain points which I'll
say now and then there's entire
slides dedicated to this later.
But I will say now which is and
I said this before,
a test passes when it does not fail,right?
So if for instance,
like you completely commented this out,
well, that still fails.
That was a bad example.
This one, it still passes,right?
And because that's under
the hood how a test suite works,
which is if this is not the case
it throws an error, all right.
And that's what fails a test,
the absence of a failure is passing.
There are some times when we get to
component testing and browser testing,
integration testing, if you will,
well that's great because it's like, hey,
go find these buttons and click them.
If you found them all,
do I need to expect anything at the end?
I can, but like you found them all versus
if that button wasn't on the page or
that like div wasn't there or something
along those lines and you blew up and
failed the test like cool, right?
Like sometimes the absence of a failure
is all I need for the pass but
sometimes we need to fail a test to
make sure that they are actually testing
the thing that we want or are
they just passing by accident.
So .fails or throwing a not in there's
sometimes it's helpful just to make sure
that we don't have a false positive.
One of the nice things about Vitest
is I don't even have to have a section.
We have like a minor
section on like edge cases.
But I have a section of like,
how do you deal with asynchronous code?
Like if it returns a promise like it all
just works using async await functions
living in 2023 or whenever you
have the watching this post 2023.
Is great because async is not nearly
as hard as it was when I was a kid.
And so you can use async await functions.
The one difference I noticed is that
a lot of older testing frameworks would
let you put done in here, and
then call it when your callback was
done to say that the test is completed.
Jest doesn't support that, it actually
takes a different argument in there.
If you really had a bunch of callbacks,
you probably wanna give yourself
some kind of abstraction like this.
That said, I wrote this test for
this workshop.
This is not a thing that I've ever
actually come across in the wild.
But I also don't have to deal
with old callback code I
mostly have promises to work with, Mark.
>> Is there a reason to use Vitest over
Jest if you're not already using Vite?
I know Vitest works better
with the ES modules.
>> Yeah, that is basically the answer.
I would say that my heuristic is like,
so for instance,
Jest comes built in to create React app,
right?
Which I understand is no longer
the canonical way to install React,
but let's not get into that right now.
I will use Jest if it's there.
I would say that if you're using
React app and you're using Jest,
that's totally cool.
If you're using Vite,
it makes sense to use Vitest.
They are in only tiny ways different.
I think that Vite is faster, right?
For us, I work these days.
Our marketing site, a bunch of those sites,
are using React, but
like the core application
is in Svelte which uses Vite.
So, originally used Jest and I was
fighting with common js versus the Es
modules but I'm done fighting with that so
I migrated it.
But that migration also
took me 90 minutes,
it did not take all that long.
So yeah, I would say that there's like,
and if you're using like Webpack and
you're using Jest already,
I think that's totally fine, right?
If you're not and
you're using Vite well, yeah,
having something that integrates
the Vite makes more sense,
allegedly is faster, but that's always
like if that could change next week.
There's also runIF and skipIf,
which will take some kind of condition and
will do what you think it
does in those situations.
Generally speaking, I would say that these
are probably a little bit more useful for
the node developers among
us who might have to deal
with some of the intricacies
of running on Windows.
Generally speaking, they are here,
you might need them one day.
I build my application for
both a SaaS platform and open source, so
like there's a world where maybe
I will need one of these one day.
They are here for you they are there but
generally speaking you
probably don't need them.
Cool like I said like you'll
notice that like it will run
basically all the tests in a folder.
Out of the box, it is looking for
anything with .test.ts.
You can change that to .spec,
you can change it to whatever you want.
You can give it a bunch of pattern
matches for include and exclude.
I will use that to dramatic effect
to skip solutions if I want to or
something along those lines or
have a different configuration working for
the Svelte app.
But generally speaking,
it will run everything with .test.ts or
anything in an __test__ directory.
If you want my personal opinion, because
you asked or somebody was about to.
I think there are two schools of thought.
I have one test directory where you put
in all your tests that are divorced
from the implementation.
I am a big fan of whatever that file name
is .ts, that file name .test.ts, right?
And just immediately having it
right next to the same file.
I don't want to traverse the file
system looking for things.
I can't handle that.